Midlet: Send position and server response . .
30Note of the author: Before starting the study of this report the reader must
have a good understanding of the J2EE and EJB technologies. The concept of
the project is presented without explicit specifications of EJB 2.1. If any doubt
on J2EE technology, refer to [9, 2].
Security is very important in some activities. Freeride, mountain walking or
climbing, paragliding are those where accidents can be serious or fatal. Having
the possibility to follow physically the position of a person on regular basis can
be comfortable for family, relatives or others.
The project is meant to propose a simple and portable solution for people to get
traced during a trip. The application is web based and should be available for
every people who have the possibility to
1. Run a small Java application on its mobile phone.
2. Has link between a GPS device and its mobile phone.
3. Has Internet access.
This concept is not new and a lot of applications involving GPS are available on
the market: nowadays almost every new car is equipped with a GPS on board
and help people in city or country side to find their road.
The concept of this project is a bit different. We are not focusing on ”where are
we?” but more on ”where he/she is?”. For this the idea is to use a cell phone which accepts to receive GPS coordinates and send them to a server able to the account of a register user (tracked person). Then from
a web client, the user can be followed on a map in real time mode.
Figure 1: GPS traker: General schema
As mentioned above, there are already a lot of applications which use the geo-
positioning. Garmin, one of the famous GPS manufacturer, proposes maps of
almost every countries in the world ready to be download into their panel of
GPS devices. Different kind of applications for different kind of public: road
maps and tracking, topologic maps for technical job like geologist (for instance),
flight’s map for pilots, etc.
Also it exist, for mountain activities like freeride, hicking, those automatic sig-
nalling systems which switch on as soon as the rider get cought by an avalanche
for example. It transmits a radio signal to the closest relay and indicate the
exact position of the victim. It helps for the search and often save lives. The
portable TomTom GPS proposes a full navigation system with vocal indication.
The list of geo-positioning applications is huge and a simple search on the In-
ternet gives hundred web sites talking about the topic.
The diagram (figure 2) shows the use cases for the application. There are
3 actors, 10 use cases which represent for different action what actors can do
with the system. The use case Start a track is in fact 2 use cases. A track
can be started from the web client or from the mobile application (cell phone
application). The use case Send a position is only available from the mobile
5application. We will see in the architecture what is done where (mobile vs
server application).use cases described in figure 2. All use cases are
now described formally.
Within the 3 actors, the manager has a special role and is automatically created
with the user Id 1. It can do exactly what a standard user can do but has special
rights that the others don’t have.
The application will allow to do:
Creation of users. Any user who wants to be followed needs to be register in
the system first. The application will offer a web interface to enter the following
Then the user receives a user Id (integer) and is recorded in the database.
This part is done on the web client side. The password must be more than 4
characters long. Any fields must be empty otherwise the user is not register.
Modification of the user profile. Once logged, the user can modify its
profile using the same data as above and same constraints.
User login This web page is the first one in the system. The user must be
identify in order to access any options. The web page contains two fields: