www.ijecs.in
International Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science ISSN: 2319-7242
Volume 6 Issue 2 Feb. 2017, Page No. 20281-20284
Index Copernicus Value (2015): 58.10, DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v6i2.22
Real Time College Bus Tracking Application for Android Smartphone
Supriya Sinha 1 , Pooja Sahu 2 , Monika Zade 3 , Roshni Jambhulkar 4 , Prof. Shrikant V. Sonekar 5
1, 2, 3 & 4
Final Year Students of Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
JD College of Engineering & Management, Maharashtra, India
supriyasudeepsinha@gmail.com 1 , poojasahu9595@gmail.com 2 , monikazade23@gmail.com 3 , roshnijambhulkar2@gmail.com 4
5
Head of the Department, Computer Science & Engineering,
JD College of Engineering & Management, Maharashtra, India
shrikantsonekar@gmail.com 5
Abstract: This paper proposes a Real-Time College Bus Tracking Application which runs on Android smart phones. This enables students
to find out the location of the bus so that they won’t get late or won’t arrive at the stop too early. The main purpose of this application is to
provide exact location of the student’s respective buses in Google Maps besides providing information like bus details, driver details, stops,
contact number, routes, etc. This application may be widely used by the college students since Android smart phones have become common
and affordable for all. It is a real time system as the current location of the bus is updated every moment in the form of latitude and
longitude which is received by the students through their application on Google maps. The application also estimates the time required to
reach a particular stop on its route. The application uses client-server technology
Keywords: GPS, Google Maps, JVM.
1. Introduction
Android has become very popular in the world since it is an
open source and there are no extra fees for Java Virtual
Machine (JVM). In today‟s world, the time is more important
for students. Being a product of high technology, mobile
phones are more widely used and are becoming more and more popular. A vehicle tracking system is a commonly used
application for tracking vehicles. Due to traffic congestion and
road works, most of the buses are delayed. People have to wait
for their bus at the bus stops for a long time without even
knowing when the bus will arrive. Thus, the arrival time of the
bus cannot be guaranteed. The main focus of the project is to
save the waiting time of students and provide them the details
of the bus.
2. Literature Survey
Dynamic Bus Time-table Using GPS [1] is a GPS based and
manual system designed to display the real-time location and
timetable of buses which can be useful for any public transport
system. The system requires working internet connection and
may or may not be GPS tracker.
Bus Locator via SMS using Android Application [2] uploads
the current location of the bus to the server. The server then
sends an SMS to all the registered students those are about to
board at the bus stop. Here the driver‟s mobile phone is used as
a GPS receiver. It is a tiresome process where the details of all
the students are to be kept and updated time to time. The server
is overloaded every now and then to get details of student at
every stop.
Real time Bus Monitoring System using GPS [3] displays the
current locations of the bus. The system consisted of a
transmitter installed on the buses and receiver boards installed
on the bus stops. It provided the relevant bus routes and other
information their clients.
Real Time Web Based Bus Tracking System [9] provides the
relevant information regarding all the bus going from user‟s
source to destination. The system is operated by GPS which is
attached with every bus. It uses external hardware set-up for its
implementation.
3. Android
Android is an open source and Linux based operating system
for smart phones, tablet computers and android wearable
devices like watches. It is developed by Google and later the
OHA (Open Handset Alliance. The main focus of android
project is to create a fruitful real-world product that enhances
the mobile experience for users. [11]
The important features of android are given below:



Open Source
Easy to customize the Android Platform.
A lot of mobile applications can be chosen by the
customer.
 Provides many appealing features like weather details,
opening screen, live RSS (Really Simple Syndication)
feeds etc.
 Provides support for messaging services(SMS and
MMS), web browser, storage (SQLite), connectivity
(GSM, CDMA, Blue Tooth, Wi-Fi etc.), media, handset
layout etc.
4. Proposed System
The proposed system provides the exact location of the bus to
the students and staffs from their location. Along with this, it
also provides the following features:
Details like Bus Number, Driver‟s Contact Number, Bus
Route, Stops, etc.
 Authentication for Admin, Driver, Registered College
Students and college staffs.
 Admin has the facility to send SMS to intended driver
and students in case of emergency.
 If the driver is not in network area , still the system will
update the location of the bus to the students and staffs
by using average speed of bus and the fixed route

Supriya Sinha, IJECS Volume 6 Issue 2 Feb., 2017 Page No.20281-20284
Page 20281DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v6i2.22
5. System Description
5.1
System Architecture
There are three modules in our application:
1.
2.
3.
Administration
Driver
Bus Information
Figure 1: System Architecture
5.2
Modules Description
Figure 2: Flow Diagram for Administration Module
When Administrator enters into the Administration module,
following screen will be provided for him to enter login
credentials.
1) Administration:
This module is for the bus administrator for updating the
information that is there in the server when required. It includes
authority to update Driver name, Driver Contact Number,
Route, Stops, etc. The administrator needs to log in before
editing or updating details. Only administrator is the authorized
user of this module. The administrator has been given a
privilege of sending text messages to bus drivers and to the
students of a particular route. It won‟t be charged to the
administrator provided that his internet connection is in
enabled mode. We are using way2sms services to accomplish
this.
The following figure shows the flow of this module.
Figure 3: Administration Login Page
2) Driver:
This module is for the bus driver. The authorized bus drivers
are provided with their unique log in credentials. They need to
log in and then have to start their location service before
driving. The current location of the bus will be updated from
driver‟s mobile to the server every moment in the form of
Supriya Sinha, IJECS Volume 6 Issue 2 Feb., 2017 Page No.20281-20284
Page 20282DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v6i2.22
latitude and longitude. The location of the bus is visible in
Google Maps when asked for.
The following figure shows the flow of this module.
them to manage their time and arrive at their stop at the proper
time, neither too early nor late.
The following figure shows the flow of this module.
Figure 4: Flow Diagram for Driver Module
When Driver enters into the Driver module, following screen
will be provided for him to enter login credentials.
Figure 6: Flow Diagram for Bus Information Module
When Student or Staff enters into this module, they need to
enter their credentials and after successful log in they will get
the following screen to view bus details.
Figure 5: Driver Login Page
3) Bus Information:
This is the most important module and is the whole and soul of
the system. The users of this module need to log in with their
unique ID provided by the college management. They can get
access to the details of all the buses of college through their
phones. Here they will get all bus and driver related
information offline too. Students can track the location of their
bus from any location. Student and staff must make sure that
their location service is active. The can also get the estimated
time of arrival of bus at their respective stops. This will help
Figure 7: List of available bus routes
6. Future Enhancement
The following features can be added up as future
enhancements:
 A feature can be added for parents, where they could be
given a privilege of receiving a text message that their
ward had board the bus safely as soon as they get into the
bus.
Supriya Sinha, IJECS Volume 6 Issue 2 Feb., 2017 Page No.20281-20284
Page 20283DOI: 10.18535/ijecs/v6i2.22

Managing of public transports likes auto-rickshaws and
trains
7. Conclusion
We developed an Android Application to track the college
buses and provide relevant information to their users. This
paper has described the design and architecture of our college
bus tracking system. Our system is composed of smart phones
and a server. The system is able to demonstrate its performance
to track college bus from any area. Furthermore, our system is
low-cost as it doesn‟t require any external hardware for
location tracking.
[9] Manini Kumbhar, Meghana Survase, Pratibha Mastud,
Avdhut Salunke,Shrinivas Sirdeshpande, “Real Time Web
Based Bus Tracking System” International Research
Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET), e-ISSN:
2395 -0056 Volume: 03 Issue: Feb-2016.
[10] Mr. Pradip Suresh Mane, Prof. Vaishali Khairnar,
“Analysis of Bus Tracking System Using Gps on Smart
Phones” IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering (IOSR-
JCE) , ISSN: 2347–8586, Vol.3, Issue 3, 2015,
Page.1057-1061.
[11] Javapoint.com, „What is Android‟ 2012. [Online].
Available:
http://www.javatpoint.com/android-what-
where-and-why. [Accessed: 23- Jun- 2014].
Acknowledgement
We would like to express our intense honor and deep regard to
our project guide Prof. Shrikant V. Sonekar for his guidance
and constant encouragement for carrying out the project.
Working under him was a great experience for us. He kept us
going, and this would not have been possible without him.
References
[1] Gunjal Sunil N. , Joshi Ajinkya V. , Gosavi Swapnil C. ,
Kshirsagar Vyanktesh B, “Dynamic Bus Timetable Using
GPS” International Journal of Advanced Research in
Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) , ISSN
:2278-1323, Volume 3, Issue 3, March 2014.
[2] Karan Punjabi, Pooja Bolaj, Pratibha Mantur, Sneha
Wali, “Bus Locator via SMS Using Android Application”
International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Technologies (IJCSIT) , ISSN :0975-9646,
Volume 5(2), 2014.
[3] Dr.(Mrs.) Saylee Gharge, Manal Chhaya, Gaurav
Chheda, Jitesh Deshpande, Niket Gajra, “Real Time Bus
Monitoring System Using GPS” Engineering Science and
Technology: An International Journal (ESTIJ), ISSN:
2250-3498, Volume 2, Number 3, June 2012.
[4] Amol Dhumal, Amol Naikoji, Yutika Patwa, Manali
Shilimkar, Prof. M. K. Nighot, “Survey Paper on Vehicle
Tracking System using GPS and Android” International
Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering
& Technology (IJARCET), ISSN: 2278 – 1323, Volume
3 Issue 11, November 2014.
[5] S. Priya , B. Prabhavathi, P. Shanmuga Priya , B.
Shanthini, “An Android Application for Tracking College
Bus Using Google Map”
International Journal of
Computer Science and Engineering Communications,
ISSN: 2347–8586, Vol.3, Issue 3, 2015, Page.1057-1061.
[6] G. Kiran Kumar, C.B. Aishwarya, A. Sai Mounika,
“College Bus Tracking Android Application using GPS”
International Journal of New Innovations in Engineering
and Technology, ISSN: 2319-6319, Volume 4, Issue 4,
April 2016.
[7] G. Jemilda, R. Bala Krishnan, B. Johnson, G. Linga
Sangeeth, “Mobile Application for College Bus Tracking”
International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile
Computing, ISSN: 2320-088X, Volume 4, Issue 3, March
2015.
[8] SeokJu Lee, Girma Tewolde, Jaerock Kwon, “Design and
Implementation of Vehicle Tracking System Using
GPS/GSM/GPRS Technology and Smart Phone
Application”
IEEE World Forum of Internet of
Things(WF-IoT), March 2014.
Supriya Sinha, IJECS Volume 6 Issue 2 Feb., 2017 Page No.20281-20284
Page 20284