G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
Available Online at www.ijcsmc.com
International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing
A Monthly Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology
ISSN 2320–088X
IJCSMC, Vol. 4, Issue. 3, March 2015, pg.500 – 507
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Mobile Application for College Bus Tracking
G. Jemilda 1 , R. Bala Krishnan 2 , B. Johnson 3 , G. Linga Sangeeth 4
1
Faculty in CSE Department, JACSI College of Engineering, Tamil Nadu, India
2,3&4
UG Scholar in CSE Department , JACSI College of Engineering, Tamil Nadu, India
jemildajeba@yahoo.com 1 , rbkrishna22@gmail.com 2 , johnvasu87@gmail.com 3 , lingasangeeth.gj@gmail.com 4
Abstract - This paper proposes an Android mobile phone application that gives information about buses, bus
numbers as well as bus routes both online and offline. Reason for Android platform Android requires an open
source development which is probably the most feasible and a present user friendly approach. This paper also
deals with Location Based Services, which are used to track the current location of the bus as well as give an
estimate remaining time for the tracked bus to reach its destination using the client –server technology. Also It
display the required maps with the help of GPS.
Keywords – GPS, client-server Technology
I.
INTRODUCTION
The mobile phone industry is one of the fastest and most dynamic business sectors today.
The need to communicate efficiently and instantaneously is always an undying necessity. The
market sector and the ever-growing and demanding consumers always want to have more, and
they want it better than ever.
Having a mobile phone for us makes life easier. Communication is always a part of daily
life, and we cannot avoid it. The invention of mobile phone has gone tremendous leaps in
innovation and new applications. Originally, it was intended to be a telephone that can be carried
wirelessly at greater distances. Advances in communications, upgrades in radio frequency and
developments on the internet had given mobile phones more sophisticated but easy to use in
applications.
For instance, authors in [1] propose an accurate map-matching algorithm for location
tracking of a mobile user that can be potentially used by privacy adversaries to accurately
reconstruct a user’s actual trace.
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
500G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
Mobile phones are now equipped with navigation systems such as GPS or Global
Position Satellite that aids travelers, tourists, adventurers and navigators on getting the most
accurate view on their present location. Not only that, it also assists them in searching for the
nearest establishment that they want to look for such as restaurants, hotels, malls, bank, police
station and other places of interests.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Jindan Zhu et al. discussed that many popular mobile applications require the
continuous monitoring and sharing of a mobile User’s location. However, exploiting a user’s
location leads to disclosing sensitive information about the Users daily activity. Several location
privacy-preserving schemes have been proposed, but it remains challenging for a user to achieve
visibility of the associated threats as well as to control the impact of those threats. This paper
presents an adaptive location privacy-preserving system (ALPS) that allows for a user to control
the level of privacy disclosure with different quality of location-based service (LBS). We have
identified key attack models on location tracking using powerful map- matching
algorithms, and then defined a scheme that allows a user to control the privacy of tracking
Information. We have implemented ALPS on Android OS and evaluated the implementation
extensively via trace-based simulation, showing the effectiveness of user-controllable privacy
preservation. [2]
RobiGrgurina et al. learned a student project developing a simple application for Android
mobile phone. The focus of this work was on the processes and development environment that
was based on open source software and we used within the project. Before this project we have
never developed mobile programming. In the beginning of the project we didn’t know what kind
of application we wanted to develop and we needed some time to decide. We were overwhelmed
with possibilities. System requirements were defined during the brainstorming session. During
application development and test we found out that some specifications needed extra clarification
because everyone had a different interpretation of the specifications. Also we left out some
details that could improve user experience like displaying current result. This experience was
very useful because we learned something new and got insight into the entire process of creating
applications. We understand the importance of formal processes for effective teamwork as is for
example in our case insufficiency defined requirements have slower our development and testing
by increasing the otherwise.
III.
ANDROID
Android is a free, open-source operating system for mobile devices. It is an open-source
development platform for creating mobile applications. Devices, particularly mobile phones, run
the Android operating system and the applications are created for it.
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
501G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
More specifically, Android is made up of several necessary and dependent parts, including the
following:




Linux operating system kernel that provides low-level interface with the hardware,
memory management, and process control.
Open-source libraries for application development, including SQLite, Web Kit, OpenGL,
and a media manager.
Software development kit used to create applications, including tools, plug-ins, and
documentation. The architecture of Android is shown in Figure 1. [4] [5]
An application framework that agnostically exposes system services to the application
layer, including the window manager and location manager, content providers, telephony,
and sensors.
Figure 1: Android Architecture
IV.
ANDROID SDK FEATURES
The true appeal of Android as a development environment lies in the APIs it provides. As
an application-neutral platform, Android gives us the opportunity to create applications that are
as much a part of the phone as anything provided out of the box.
The following list highlights some of the most noteworthy Android features:

No licensing, distribution, or development fees or release approval processes

GSM, EDGE, and 3G networks for telephony or data transfer, enabling us to make or
receive calls or SMS messages, or to send and retrieve data across mobile networks.

Libraries for using Bluetooth to transfer data peer-to-peer.

Full support for applications that integrate map controls as part of their user interface.

Media libraries for playing and recording a variety of audio/video or still image format .
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
502G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
V.
METHODOLOGIES
This application contains the three modules
 Admin
 Client
 Driver
and the block diagram is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Block diagram
A. Admin
Admin can login to the admin account after authentication and authorization. He can
enter new route details and also he can select the route from the list of routes and then the
corresponding stops are displayed. He has the options to add or remove a route. He also has the
option to modify or remove a stop from the route. If admin want to say any information to the
driver then he can send the message to the driver’s mobile via the browser. He can also enter
new student details and can view the list of students. He has the options to add or remove a
student details. The below figure 3 shows the home page of admin.
Figure 3: Admin home page
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
503G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
B. Client
The below figure 4 represents the flow of actions of client.
Figure 4: Flow Diagram of client application
Client has to enter the register number and mobile number to login the application. To
search for a bus, client has to enter the bus number in the search bar. Then map is displayed
which shows the current location of the bus. He can also receive an alert notification when the
bus came to the nearest stop.
When the application is launched, the home Activity fetches the routes from the server
and binds it to the spinner for the client to select it. When the client selects a route,
corresponding stops are fetched from the server and binded to the spinner for the client to select.
If the client selects “Get Location” then the location details of the bus for that route is fetched.
If the client selects “Show Map” then the location of the bus on the map will be displayed. The
below figure 5 shows the client login page.
Figure 5: Client Login Page
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
504G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
C. Driver
The below figure 6 shows the flow of actions of driver.
Figure 6: Flow Diagram of Driver Application
Driver has to enter the bus number, route id, and mobile number to login the application. Driver
works is only start and stop the bus.
When the application is launched, the homeActivity fetches the routes from the server
and binds it to the spinner for the driver to select it. If the driver selects “Start”, the location of
the bus will be uploaded to the server. If the driver selects “Stop” then the uploading of location
of the bus is stopped. The below figure 7 shows the driver login page.
Figure 7: Driver Login Page
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
505G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
D. Scope
Using this application,

The passengers can easily select bus route number and their stop from the list of bus route
numbers and know where the bus is and how long will it take to reach their stop.

They can also know the exact location of the bus on the Google Map which gives them a
better idea on the whereabouts of the bus.

The list of bus routes and their corresponding stops can be managed using the website
which gives the admin a better hold on the application.

This application helps the students and staff to track their buses and also college
authorities to manage efficiently.
VI.
TESTING
Software testing is a process used for verifying the correctness, completeness and quality
of the developed software. Software is built out of sub-systems that are composed of modules,
which in turn are composed of procedures and functions.
The sequence of testing activities performed for the tracking system is as below:
o Unit Testing
o Integration Testing
o System Testing
A. Unit Testing
There exist a number of components in every sub-system. Every component is tested
using respective test procedures. Each component is tested individually based on their needs.
Unit test focuses verification effort on the smallest unit of the software design component.
B. Integration Testing
Integration tests are designed to test integrated software components to determine if they
actually run as one program.
C. System Testing
System testing is the stage of implementation. Testing is the process of executing a
program with the intent of finding an error. A good test case is one that has a high probability of
finding a yet undiscovered error.
VII.
FUTURE ENHANCEMENTS
After analyzing the test results of the developed systems, the following issues are still
open which can be taken up as future enhancements.
As Android phones are widely used everywhere, it is obvious that applications like these
offer simple solutions to do our daily activities. These Android applications can be used in future
to manage not only college buses but also the vehicles that belong to the institution. These
applications can also be used in any other domain to carry out fleet management efficiently.
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
506G. Jemilda et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.4 Issue.3, March- 2015, pg. 500-507
The proposed system can further be enhanced by making use of it in BMTC bus tracking
systems and also to report accidents and help in traffic monitoring. It can also be made
compatible with IOS and Windows OS supporting systems.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
In this project, we have presented an Android Application to track the college buses
Figure 8: Google Map
The two Android applications designed are: One for the Driver to start uploading the
bus’s location to the server and the other for the user to retrieve the location of the bus and check
how much time the bus takes to reach a particular stop and also to see the location of the bus on
the Google Map. They all are displayed on Figure 8.
We have also designed a web portal for the admin to manage the bus routes and the stops
they cover.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Thiagarajan, L. S. Ravindranath, H. Balakrishnan, S. Madden, and L. Girod,
“Accurate, Low-Energy Trajectory Mapping for Mobile Devices,” in 8th USENIX NSDI,
Boston, MA, March 2011.
[2] Jindan Zhu,1 Kyu-Han Kim,2 Prasant Mohapatra,1 and Paul Congdon2 “An Adaptive
Privacy-Preserving Scheme for Location Tracking of a Mobile User” 2013 IEEE
International Conference on sensing, Communication and networking.
[3] RobiGrgurina, Goran Brestovac and TihanaGalinacGrbac, “Development Environment for
Android Application Development: an Experience Report”, MIPRO 2011, May 23-27, 2011.
[4] J.F. DiMarzio, Android A Programmer’s Guide, Chicago: McGraw-Hill, Jul. 2008.
[5] Android Developers, http://www.androidin.com/.
© 2015, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved
507